A Journey in Grace — Richard Belcher
Chapters 17–19 Transcription (pages 75–84)


17.
A pressing invitation

On Saturday morning, following the consideration of doctrine with Terry and the scene with Todd, a phone-call came as I was getting ready to leave for my church visitation work. It was from the pulpit committee chairman of the First Baptist Church. He insisted that I have breakfast with him. I agreed since I had planned to stop somewhere for breakfast anyway.

As we met at a local restaurant, he reiterated the conviction of their committee that I was the man for their church. I raised again all my objections — my age, my lack of a college degree, my need for a seminary education, my single state, etc. He refused to consider any of them as prohibitive.

So, I finally pulled out my ultimate argument — Dr Bloom. I told him, 'You've got one man in your church who will oppose my coming, even if he has to take it to the college officials or the highest ranks of the denomination.'

He was obviously shocked and immediately asked, 'Who has been in touch with you to make such a threat?'

'Dr Bloom!' I replied. 'He has accused me not only of pursuing the church, but also of being a Calvinist.'

He got quite upset at this point: 'He's way out of line! I don't know about the accusation of being a Calvinist, but I know you haven't pursued this church — we've pursued you, and you barely will give us the time of day!'

Then he made a proposition: 'Look, why don't you come and preach for us one weekend? It won't be a trial sermon, but just an opportunity for you to see our church, and for our church to see you. On that Sunday afternoon you can meet with the pulpit committee to do one of several things: either ask us questions about the church, if God has created an interest in the work; or you can tell us to get lost and never bother you again; or ask us to pray about the matter further, while you continue to seek God's will on the issue. And you let us take care of Dr Bloom!'

His last remark was the most interesting of all at the time. Maybe, I thought, they could give me some relief from Dr Bloom. Maybe they could tell him the facts of the case, rather than my having to try to defend myself. Also, it might give me an opportunity to convince them once and for all I was not their man and put an end to their pursuit of me.

So, I agreed to his suggestion, and we set a date about a month off so I could make arrangements at my own church. I was really interested to see how they would deal with Dr Bloom! That alone would make the weekend worthwhile.

During the rest of the week, following a busy Sunday, I gave much thought to the question Terry and I were to discuss the next Friday — how the view of unconditional election could leave us with a just God. Several lines of thought began to develop in my mind.

First, I wondered whose definition of justice one could use to test God's actions! If he is God, should not he be the one to define and determine what constituted justice and just actions?

Second, when did God's decree of election take place in relation to man's fall? Could it be that, if the decree relating to the Fall came first, and was followed by the decree to elect some, then the accusation of injustice against unconditional election would have no ground? I set aside a free afternoon to do some further reading in this area before meeting with Terry.

The rest of the weekend was fairly normal except for an encounter with Jim Mitchell, the former pastor at Lime Creek. I ran into him in a local shop, and he was still complaining about not getting credit for the work he started. Then he had the nerve to ask me if I would recommend him to a certain church which was looking for a pastor. His argument was that since he was the one who had laid the groundwork for the working of God at Lime Creek, then I should have no question in recommending him to another church, even though his Lime Creek pastorate had been controversial.

Then I made the mistake of raising the wrong question! I asked him if he was still an unbalanced Calvinist who would do again the same things he did at Lime Creek — use of unknown terminology to the people; theological lectures instead of biblical sermons; long, unending sermons; an air of superiority; each sermon a theological dissertation on one of the five points of Calvinism; and the use of 'thee' and 'thou' in his sermons.

My question was meant to help me determine if I could, or could not, recommend him, but he didn't take it that way. He apparently saw it as an accusation of incompetence for the ministry, and instead of answering me, he whirled round and walked out of the shop without saying another word. Obviously, he felt I had no right to question him, his beliefs or practices, and regarded me as a theological novice who was incapable, or unworthy, of any discussions with such a brilliant mind as his!

I did come to a conclusion that I hoped I would remember. I was convinced that his extreme form of Calvinism was not his main problem! His main problem was one of personality. I also noted that the ministry often drew strange personalities. I was not questioning any man's call to preach, but I saw that the ministry could well be of interest to a man if he wanted, or liked, to be the centre of attention, or if he wanted some authority over others, or thrived on the thrill of importance. Couple that personality weakness with an unbalanced view of any theology, including Calvinism, and it could create a monster capable of an incalculable amount of damage to a church and the souls in it.

At the same time I realized that not every church problem is necessarily a personality problem on the part of the pastor. Personality problems can exist in the other members of the church and can create equal havoc. Couple the strange twists of personalities with certain twists of theology, and add to that a membership in some churches of those who have never been born again, and the problems are compounded.

But then again, I had to admit that not all church problems are personality problems. True, the personality can get in the way and create chaos, but problems can also legitimately come over truth and doctrine, even when personalities are under control.

Some people would attribute all church problems to questions of personality. Others would say they are mostly doctrinal. I concluded the basis could be either, but whatever the principal cause, at least one other element would no doubt also be involved somewhere along the line. A problem in personality could make a legitimate doctrinal problem even greater, and vice-versa.

I was amazed at what the Lord was teaching me!


18.
Is it fair?

On the next Friday evening Terry and I tackled the questions left over from the previous week — did unconditional election leave us with an unjust God? That is to say, if God chose the elect on the basis of his sovereign will alone, and without consideration of anything in man, then would not God be unjust in choosing one and bypassing another? We reached several conclusions.

First, if God's decree of election followed the decree of the fall of man (this view, I learned, was called infralapsarianism), then all men were seen at the decree of election as undeserving of God's grace. Not only that, all were deserving of eternal hell and certainly had no basis to claim God's grace or love. Therefore, how could anyone accuse God of being unjust if he chose on the basis of his sovereign will to save a people from this fallen and undeserving mass?

Secondly, even if we refused to consider the order of the decrees, or if we were to place the decree to elect before the decree to allow the Fall (this view is called supralapsarianism), that would not make God unfair or unjust either. We reached this conclusion by consulting an English dictionary to define these words that men so often say would apply to God, if unconditional election were true. We noted the following words and definitions:

	Arbitrary: based on, or subject to, one's opinion, judgement, prejudice, etc.; absolute, despotic.
	Despot: an absolute monarch; an autocrat; a tyrant.
	Despotism: unlimited authority; absolute power.
	Tyrant: one who rules oppressively or cruelly; a despot; one who exercises absolute power without legal warrant, whether ruling well or cruelly.
	Dictator: a supreme ruler invested with extraordinary power; an arbitrary or dictatorial person.
	Dictatorial: a person having absolute power of government, especially one considered to be a tyrant or oppressor; one who rules, exercises, or subjugates authoritatively.

Next, we noted reasons why these words could not be used in reference to God even if unconditional election was true.

1. All of the above words are used to speak of equals in relating to one another. But God and man are not equals! God is God, the eternal sovereign, and man is man, the limited creature. It is not proper to press upon God an equality with man and to judge God by human standards and definitions of justice.

2. All of the above words, if applied to election and reprobation, ignore completely God and man's sinful condition, and the fact that man deserves nothing before God, not even acceptance with any judgement.

Our conclusion was that unconditional election was not only biblical, but was also defensible before the accusations usually raised against it. We spent the rest of the evening in awe as we contemplated God's electing grace, which had been manifested to us. We concluded that we could ask many questions about grace (What is it? What are its results, etc.?), and why grace is manifested is not one of them. The pure nature and definition of grace will not permit any such questions as to why God bestows grace upon any, far less upon even a single fallen and undeserving sinner.

We also agreed that this evening and our discussion study would have to be delayed until after the end of term and after the weekend preaching engagement at First Baptist Church in Collegetown, because we felt a need to do some more reading and studying before tackling the doctrine of limited atonement.


19.
A difficult meeting

The weekend at First Baptist Church of Collegetown was uneventful until the Sunday afternoon meeting with the pulpit committee, which somehow, to my surprise, became an open church meeting with a certain person very much in evidence! I nearly didn't stay for the meeting, since I had been told it would be the pulpit committee only, and since my old nemesis, Dr Bloom, was present for who knew what purpose? Also, I wondered how they were going to conduct such a meeting, when I had been told by the chairman of the pulpit committee that this would be my chance to tell them either to get lost, to pray further about the matter, or to ask questions about the church. I also wondered what had happened to the chairman's promise to take care of the problem with Dr Bloom. (I found out later that it was Dr Bloom who had insisted on such a set-up!)

He was present at all three of the weekend services (which had been feebly attended), and he sat with a non-committal look, and spoke not a single word to me about anything, let alone one of the sermons. At the end of each service he vanished, almost as if magically leaving by some supernatural power at some uncommon exit. To say I felt overwhelmingly uneasy over this surprise Sunday afternoon setting would be fully accurate and correct. I decided to listen and find out what direction the meeting would take before uttering a word.

The chairman of the pulpit committee began the service by leading in prayer (a general prayer from which I learned nothing of what to expect in the procedures to follow). Next, he gave an overview of the events that had led to the present situation, including the work of the committee and their contacts with me, and why they believed I was the man for their church. He then reiterated that the entire committee was of one mind that I was the candidate for their church.

Then he made his crucial statement — that the meeting was open for questions or discussion from the floor.

It did not take Dr Bloom long to make his move. He rose to his feet and spoke at length: 'I have serious concerns about this young man that I must bring to the attention of this church. His views on God's sovereignty and election will destroy our commitment to foreign missions? Besides that, I have given the pulpit committee the names of numerous older and more stable and doctrinally sound men — men they have refused to consider. I don't know how this young man has so mesmerized you all! Believe me, he is not for our church. I know him, as I have had him as a student, and I have clashed with him before over doctrine as I sought to help him understand Baptist doctrine for our day. He is narrow, bigoted, unteachable and rebellious against authority, as well as non-Baptistic in doctrine. I do hope you all, including the pulpit committee, give up your pursuit of him and realize he may be pursuing this church by reverse psychology as he is playing hard to get. Please look for a pastor from one of the countless good men who are faithful to our denomination and doctrine!'

As he sat down, I thought, 'Well, Mr Chairman, you really did take care of Dr Bloom! You let him make every false accusation against me in the book!'

I also wondered how I could ever begin to reply or defend myself against all those accusations — a distorted view of God; a killer of missions and evangelism; narrow, bigoted, unteachable and rebellious; non-Baptistic in doctrine; pursuing the church; and who knows what else? And all because he perceived me to be a Calvinist — which I was not!

Only when it was obvious the chairman of the pulpit committee was not going to come to my aid, did I reply. Rather than defend myself point by point, I said with a smile, 'If I were all those things Dr Bloom accuses me of being, I wonder how I ever was ordained; or how Lime Creek Baptist Church ever called me; or how we ever saw such a great revival and salvation of souls in the church this spring; or how I ever am allowed to stay in college! My life and record of ministry are open to anyone who wishes to examine them, rather than listen to the false accusations of another. I assure you, if I ever become a candidate to pastor your church, you can ask me about any or all of these accusations. But now, I am your guest, and the discussion of these issues, I feel, is not only unnecessary at this point, but out of order. Yet even in God's providence, he may have used Dr Bloom to close the door to any possibility for me to pastor here, which is fine with me, if that be God's will. I will take it all as an answer to my prayer for direction. So, Mr Chairman, I suggest we close this meeting with prayer and busy ourselves to get ready for the evening service.'

In view of the fact that there was a heavy spirit in the air, he followed my suggestion. The evening service was difficult for me. I left the church and drove to Terry's house after the service, sighing inwardly, 'I'm glad that's over!' and with a certainty that the afternoon meeting had ended First Baptist Church's interest in me once and for ever. I could hardly wait till next Sunday to see my own people and to get back into the pulpit at Lime Creek! Anyway, who wanted to be the pastor to fifty people in a building that seated a thousand?
